To see a world in a grain of sand and heaven in a wild flower Hold infinity in the palms of your hand and eternity in an hour.
I must create a system or be enslaved by another mans; I will not reason and compare: my business is to create.
If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to man as it is, infinite.
Think in the morning. Act in the noon. Eat in the evening. Sleep in the night.
What is now proved was once only imagined.
Hindsight is a wonderful thing but foresight is better, especially when it comes to saving life, or some pain!
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty !
He who binds to himself a joy Does the winged life destroy; But he who kisses the joy as it flies Lives in eternity’s sun rise.
You never know what is enough unless you know what is more than enough.
He who desires, but acts not, breeds pestilence.
You become what you behold.
Some are born to sweet delight, Some are born to endless night.
In the universe, there are things that are known, and things that are unknown, and in between, there are doors.
The road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom.
The fool who persists in his folly will become wise.
Gratitude is heaven itself.
The world of imagination is the world of eternity. It is the divine bosom into which we shall all go after death of the vegetative body.
This life’s dim windows of the soul Distorts the heavens from pole to pole And leads you to believe a lie When you see with, not through, the eye.
In your own bosom you bear your heaven and earth, And all you behold, though it appears without, It is within, in your imagination, Of which this world of mortality is but a shadow.
The imagination is not a state: it is the human existence itself.
It is easier to forgive an enemy than to forgive a friend.
Execution is the chariot of genius.
The busy bee has no time for sorrow.
The true method of knowledge is experiment.
Every Night and every Morn Some to Misery are born. Every Morn and every Night Some are born to Sweet Delight, Some are born to Endless Night.
Tyger! Tyger! burning bright In the forests of the night, What immortal hand or eye Could frame thy fearful symmetry?
The man who never alters his opinions is like standing water, and breeds reptiles of the mind.
Energy is eternal delight.
Why stand we here trembling around, calling on God for help, and not ourselves, in whom God dwells?
Knowledge is Life with wings.
And we are put on this earth a little space that we might learn to bear the beams of love.
No bird soars too high if he soars with his own wings.
Each man must create his own system, or else he is a slave to another man’s.
Great things are done when men and mountains meet.
Pride is a personal commitment. It is an attitude which separates excellence from mediocrity.
Prisons are built with stones of Law. Brothels with the bricks of religion.
Gratitude is heaven itself; there could be no heaven without gratitude.
I see through my eyes, not with them.
For everything that lives is holy, life delights in life.
As a man is, so he sees.
Enlightenment means taking full responsibility for your life.
The eye altering, alters all.
One Power alone makes a Poet: Imagination. The Divine Vision.
I am in you and you in me, mutual in divine love.
A robin redbreast in a cage Puts all heaven in a rage.
A truth that’s told with bad intent beats all the lies you can invent.
Nature has no outline. Imagination has.
How can a bird that is born for joy Sit in a cage and sing?
He who kisses joy as it flies by will live in eternity’s sunrise.
To generalize is to be an idiot.
Do what you will, this world’s a fiction and is made up of contradiction.
Work up imagination to the state of vision.
Without Unceasing Practice nothing can be done. Practice is Art. If you leave off you are lost.
Celebrate your existence!
Love is weak when there is more doubt than there is trust, but love is most strong when you learn to trust even with all the doubts. If a thing loves, it is infinite.
We are led to believe a lie When we see not through the eye.
Eternity is in love with the productions of time.
Art is the tree of life. Science is the tree of death.
Man has no Body distinct from his Soul; for that called Body is a portion of Soul discerned by the five Senses, the chief inlets of Soul in this age.
Joy and woe are woven fine, A clothing for the soul divine. Under every grief and pine Runs a joy with silken twine.
The eagle never lost so much time as when he submitted to learn of the crow.
God is the poetic genius in each of us.
Man was made for joy and woe Then when this we rightly know Through the world we safely go. Joy and woe are woven fine A clothing for the soul to bind.
A fool sees not the same tree that a wise man sees.
Improvement makes straight roads, but the crooked roads without improvement are roads of genius.
I was angry with my friend: I told my wrath, my wrath did end. I was angry with my foe: I told it not, my wrath did grow.
The naked women’s body is a portion of eternity too great for the eye of man.
I have conversed with the spiritual Sun. I saw him on Primrose Hill.
The roaring of lions, the howling of wolves, the raging of the stormy sea, and the destructive sword, are portions of eternity, too great for the eye of man.
The thankful receiver bears a plentiful harvest.
When I tell the truth, it is not for the sake of convincing those who do not know it, but for the sake of defending those that do.
Where others see but the dawn coming over the hill, I see the soul of God shouting for joy.
He who has few things to desire cannot have many to fear.
What seems to be, is, to those to whom it seems to be, and is productive of the most dreadful consequences to those to whom it seems to be, even of torments, despair, eternal death.
Innocence dwells with Wisdom, but never with ignorance...
Bring me my bow of burning gold: Bring me my arrows of desire: Bring me my spear: O clouds, unfold! Bring me my chariot of fire.
The nakedness of woman is the work of God.
I myself do nothing. The Holy Spirit accomplishes all through me.
Art can never exist without naked beauty displayed.
For the Eye altering alters all; The Senses roll themselves in fear And the flat Earth becomes a Ball.
To the eyes of the man of imagination, nature is imagination itself.
Love seeketh not itself to please, nor for itself hath any care, but for another gives its ease, and builds a Heaven in Hell’s despair.
They who forgive most shall be most forgiven.
The fox provides for himself, but God provides for the lion.
To generalize is to be an idiot. To particularize is the alone distinction of merit. General knowledge are those knowledge that idiots possess.
What is grand is necessarily obscure to weak men. That which can be made explicit to the idiot is not worth my care.
Exuberance is beauty.
Excessive sorrow laughs. Excessive joy weeps.
For Mercy has a human heart Pity, a human face: And Love, the human form divine, And Peace, the human dress.
Mans desires are limited by his perceptions; none can desire what he has not perceived.
If the Sun and Moon should ever doubt, they’d immediately go out.
He whose face gives no light, shall never become a star.
When thought is closed in caves, then love shall show its root in deepest hell.
When a sinister person means to be your enemy, they always start by trying to become your friend.
God only acts and is, in existing beings or men.
In every cry of every man, In every infant’s cry of fear, In every voice, in every ban, The mind-forg’d manacles I hear.
Without contraries is no progression. Attraction and repulsion, reason and energy, love and hate, are necessary to human existence.
Expect poison from the standing water.
The cut worm forgives the plow.
I will not cease from mental fight Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand.
Opposition is true friendship.
If a thing loves, it is infinite.
Time is the Mercy of Eternity.
Without contraries there is no progression.
The Woman that does not love your Frowns Will never embrace your smiles.
The hand of Vengeance found the Bed To which the Purple Tyrant fled The iron hand crush’d the tyrant’s head And became Tyrant in his stead.
The ruins of time build mansions in eternity.
Children of the future age Reading this indignant page Know that in a former time Love, sweet love, was thought a crime.
For all eternity, I forgive you and you forgive me.
To some people a tree is something so incredibly beautiful that it brings tears to the eyes. To others it is just a green thing that stands in the way.
God appears, and God is Light, to those poor souls who dwell in Night; but does a Human Form display to those who dwell in realms of Day.
The eye sees more than the heart knows.
The bird a nest, the spider a web, man friendship.
One thought fills immensity.
Imitation is criticism.
Drive your cart and plow over the bones of the dead.
How can the bird that is born for joy Sit in a cage and sing? How can a child, when fears annoy, But droop his tender wing, And forget his youthful spring?
You throw the sand against the wind and the wind blows it back again.
Hold infinity in the palm of your hand.
Always be ready to speak your mind, and a base man will avoid you.
Everything is beautiful in its own way. Exuberance is beauty.
He who will not bend to Love must be subdu’d by Fear.
In seed time learn, in harvest teach, in winter enjoy.
Mere enthusiasm is the all in all.
Those who restrain their desires, do so because theirs is weak enough to be restrained.
Prudence is a rich, ugly, old maid courted by incapacity.
I cry, Love! Love! Love! happy happy Love! free as the mountain wind!
First thought is best in Art, second in other matters.
I give you the end of a golden string, Only wind it into a ball, It will lead you in at Heaven’s gate Built in Jerusalem’s wall.
I live by Miracle.
A dog starved at his master’s gate Predicts the ruin of the state.
The fox condemns the trap, not himself.
Wisdom is sold in a desolate marketplace where none can come to buy.
The hours of folly are measured by the clock; but of wisdom, no clock can measure.
If you have form’d a circle to go into, Go into it yourself, and see how you would do. They said this mystery never shall cease: The priest promotes war, and the soldier peace.
The Goddess Fortune is the devil’s servant, ready to kiss any one’s ass.
There is a Moment in each Day that Satan cannot find.
Such, such were the joys When we all, girls and boys, In our youth time were seen On the Echoing Green.
The tigers of wrath are wiser than the horses of instruction.
The weak in courage is strong in cunning.
When the stars threw down their spears, and watered heaven with their tears, did he smile his work to see? Did he who made the Lamb make thee?
Nothing is real beyond imaginative patterns men make of reality.
The human mind cannot go beyond the gift of God, the Holy Ghost. To suppose that art can go beyond the finest specimens of art that are now in the world is not knowing what art is; it is being blind to the gifts of the spirit.
Each man is haunted until his humanity awakens.
And did those feet in ancient time Walk upon England’s mountains green? And was the holy Lamb of God On England’s pleasant pastures seen?
Heaven is in a grain of sand.
The cistern contains: The fountain overflows.
You cannot have Liberty in this world without what you call Moral Virtue, and you cannot have Moral Virtue without the slavery of that half of the human race who hate what you call Moral Virtue.
You’ve always had the power right there in your shoes, you just had to learn it for yourself.
If Christianity was morality, Socrates would be the Saviour.
Where mercy, love, and pity dwell, there God is dwelling too.
Enthusiastic Admiration is the first Principle of Knowledge and its last.
The pride of the peacock is the glory of God. The lust of the goat is the bounty of God. The wrath of the lion is the wisdom of God. The nakedness of woman is the work of God.
What is it men in women do require: The lineaments of gratified desire. What is it women do in men require: The lineaments of gratified desire.
What is the price of experience? Do men buy it for a song? Or wisdom for a dance in the street? No, it is bought with the price of all the man hath, his house, his wife, his children.
As I was walking among the fires of Hell, delighted with the enjoyments of Genius; which to Angels look like torment and insanity, I collected some of their Proverbs.
Shame is pride’s cloak.
Kill not the moth nor butterfly, For the Last Judgement draweth nigh.
He who makes his law a curse, by his own law shall surely die.
I thought Love lived in the hot sunshine, But O, he lives in the moony light! I thought to find Love in the heat of day, But sweet Love is the comforter of night.
The foundation of empire is art and science. Remove them or degrade them, and the empire is no more. Empire follows art and not vice versa as Englishmen suppose.
As a man is, so he sees. As the eye is formed, such are its powers.
The Sick Rose O Rose, thou art sick. The invisible worm That flies in the night In the howling storm Has found out thy bed Of crimson joy, And his dark secret love Does thy life destroy.
Energy is the only life, and is from the body; and reason is the bound or outward circumference of energy. Energy is eternal delight.
O God, protect me from my friends, that they have not power over me. Thou hast giv’n me power to protect myself from thy bitterest enemies.
Dip him in the river who loves water.
We are not meant to resolve all contradictions but to live with them and rise above them.
The reason Milton wrote in fetters when he wrote of Angels and God, and at liberty when of Devils and Hell, is because he was a true poet and of the Devil’s party without knowing it.
When the sun rises, do you not see a round disc of fire somewhat like a guinea? O no, no, I see an innumerable company of the heavenly host crying Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord God Almighty.
Active Evil is better than Passive Good.
Can I see another’s woe, and not be in sorrow too? Can I see another’s grief, and not seek for kind relief?
I have no name: I am but two days old. What shall I call thee? I happy am, Joy is my name. Sweet joy befall thee!
To Mercy, Pity, Peace and Love All pray in their distress, And to these virtues of delight Return their thankfulness.
I am under the direction of messengers from Heaven daily and nightly.
All the destruction in Christian Europe has arisen from deism, which is natural religion.
Better to shun the bait than struggle in the snare.
The vision of Christ that thou dost see Is my vision’s greatest enemy.
But when he has done this, let him not say that he knows better than his master, for he only holds a candle in sunshine.
Every object that is loved forms the center of a paradise.
How do you know but ev’ry Bird that cuts the airy way, Is an immense world of delight, clos’d by your senses five?
To be an Error and to be Cast out is a part of God’s Design.
Listen to the fool’s reproach! It is a kingly title!
Pay attention to minute particulars. Take care of the little ones. Generalization and abstraction are the plea of the hypocrite, scoundrel, and knave.
For everything exists and not one sigh nor smile nor tear, one hair nor particle of dust, not one can pass away.
The busy bee has no time for sorrow. The hours of folly are measur’d by the clock, but of wisdom: no.
May God us keep From Single vision and Newton’s sleep.
The atoms of Democritus And Newton’s particles of light Are sands upon the Red Sea shore, Where Israel’s tents do shine so bright.
One law for lion and ox is oppression.
The worship of God is, Honouring his gifts in other men each according to his genius, and loving the greatest men best; those who envy or calumniate great men hate God, for there is no other God.
As the caterpillar chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs on, so the priest lays his curse on the fairest joys.
If you trap the moment before it’s ripe, The tears of repentence you’ll certainly wipe; But if once you let the ripe moment go You can never wipe off the tears of woe.
More! More! is the cry of a mistaken soul.
The most sublime act is to set another before you.
A good local pub has much in common with a church, except that a pub is warmer, and there’s more conversation.
Imagination is the real and eternal world of which this vegetable universe is but a faint shadow.
Prepare your hearts for Death’s cold hand! prepare Your souls for flight, your bodies for the earth; Prepare your arms for glorious victory; Prepare your eyes to meet a holy God! Prepare, prepare!
When thou seest an eagle, thou seest a portion of genius; lift up thy head!
Thy friendship oft has made my heart to ache: do be my enemy for friendship’s sake.
Since all the riches of this world May be gifts from the Devil and earthly kings, I should suspect that I worshipp’d the Devil If I thank’d my God for worldly things.
There is a smile of love, And there is a smile of deceit, And there is a smile of smiles In which these two smiles meet.
The Old and New Testaments are the Great Code of Art.
Truth can never be told so as to be understood and not be believed.
He who would do good to another must do it in Minute Particulars: general Good is the plea of the scoundrel, hypocrite, and flatterer, for Art and Science cannot exist but in minutely organized Particulars.
The person who does not believe in miracles surely makes it certain that he or she will never take part in one.
O Earth, O Earth, return! Arise from out the dewy grass; Night is worn; And the morn Rises from the slumbrous mass.
Every wolf’s and lion’s howl Raises from Hell a human soul.
He who doubts from what he sees Will ne’er believe, do what you please.
The vision of Christ that thou dost see is my vision’s greatest enemy. Both read the Bible day and night, but thou read’st black where I read white. His seventy disciples sent against religion and government .
The grave is Heaven’s golden gate, And rich and poor around it wait; O Shepherdess of England’s fold, Behold this gate of pearl and gold!
The soul of sweet delight, can never be defiled.
And I watered it in fears, Night and morning with my tears; And I sunned it with smiles, And with soft deceitful wiles.
For I dance And drink and sing, Till some blind hand Shall brush my wing. If thought is life And strength and breath And the want Of thought is death Then am I A happy fly If I live Or if I die.
And I made a rural pen, And I stained the water clear, And I wrote my happy songs Every Child may joy to hear.
Time is the mercy of Eternity; without Time’s swiftness Which is the swiftest of all things, all were eternal torment.
Joys impregnate. Sorrows bring forth.
If you cannot imagine with the mind’s eye much more than you can see with the mortal eye, you have a very poor imagination indeed.
Every thing possible to be believ’d is an image of truth.
England! awake! awake! awake! Jerusalem thy sister calls! Why wilt thou sleep the sleep of death And close her from thy ancient walls?
He who sees the Infinite in all things sees God. He who sees the Ratio only sees himself only.
Little Lamb, who made thee? Dost thou know who made thee?
Father, O father! what do we here In this land of unbelief and fear?
Great things are done when men and mountains meet; this is not done by jostling in the street.
And is he honest who resists his genius or conscience only for the sake of present ease or gratification.
The tree which moves some to tears of joy is in the eyes of others only a green thing that stands in the way.
Life delights in life.
He who sees the Infinite in all things sees God.
He who loves his enemies betrays his friends; this surely is not what Jesus meant.
Nothing can be more contemptible than to suppose Public Records to be true.
Vision is the end of religion.
My work is visionary or imaginative. That which can be made explicit to the idiot is not worth my care...
To the eyes of a miser a guinea is more beautiful than the sun.
General knowledges are those knowledges that idiots possess.
He who sees the Infinite in all things sees God. He who sees the Ratio only sees himself only. Therefore God becomes as we are, that we may be as he is.
If you would help another man, you must do so in minute particulars.
The Vision of Christ that thou dost see, Is my vision’s greatest enemy. Thine is the Friend of all Mankind, Mine speaks in Parables to the blind. Thine loves the same world that mine hates, Thy heaven-doors are my hell gates.
The Errors of a Wise Man make your Rule Rather than the Perfections of a Fool.
The crow wished everything was black, the Owl, that everything was white.
The strongest poison ever known came from Caesar’s laurel crown.
To create a little flower is the labour of ages.
Does the Eagle know what is in the pit Or wilt thou go ask the Mole? Can Wisdom be put in a silver rod, Or Love in a golden bowl?
The child’s toys and the old man’s reasons are the fruits of two seasons.
The lamb misused breeds public strife And yet forgives the butcher’s knife.
He who pretends to be either painter or engraver without being a master of drawing is an imposter.
As the air to a bird or the sea to a fish, so is contempt to the contemptible.
The best wine is the oldest, the best water the newest.
I have mental joys and mental health, Mental friends and mental wealth, I’ve a wife that I love and that loves me; I’ve all but riches bodily.
Sooner strangle an infant in its cradle than nurse unacted desires.
Since the French Revolution Englishmen are all intermeasurable one by another, certainly a happy state of agreement to which I forone do not agree.
Mysteries are not to be solved. They eye goes blind when it only wants to see why.
It is an easy thing to talk of patience to the afflicted.
I cannot consider death as any thing but a removing from one room to another.
Abstinence sows sand all over The ruddy limbs and flaming hair, But desire gratified Plants fruits of life and beauty there.
I was in a Printing-house in Hell, and saw the method in which knowledge is transmitted from generation to generation.
O why was I born with a different face? Why was I not born like the rest of my race?
Without minute neatness of execution, the sublime cannot exist! Grandeur of ideas is founded on precision of ideas.
Where there is money there is no art.
Mutual forgiveness of each vice. Such are the Gates of Paradise.
Why cannot the ear be closed to its own destruction? Or the glistening eye to the poison of a smile?
Tools were made and born were hands, Every farmer understands.
Innate ideas are in every man, born with him; they are truly himself. The man who says that we have no innate ideas must be a fool and knave, having no conscience or innate science.
The man who never in his mind and thoughts travel’d to heaven is no artist.
Everything that lives, lives not alone, nor for itself.
Why a tender curb upon the youthful burning boy? Why a little curtain of flesh on the bed of our desire?
Both read the Bible day and night, but thou read black where I read white.
There can be no Good Will. Will is always Evil; it is persecution to others or selfishness.
Does a firm persuasion that a thing is so, make it so?
The inquiry in England is not whether a man has talents and genius, but whether he is passive and polite and a virtuous ass and obedient to noblemen’s opinions in art and science. If he is, he is a good man. If not, he must be starved.
He who shall hurt the little wren Shall never be beloved by men.
Error is created; truth is eternal.
Piping down the valleys wild, Piping songs of pleasant glee, On a cloud I saw a child, And he laughing said to me: “Pipe a song about a Lamb. So I piped with merry cheer; “Piper, pipe that song again. So I piped; he wept to hear.
You smile with pomp and rigor, you talk of benevolence and virtue; I act with benevolence and virtue and get murdered time after time.
Desperate remorse swallows the present in a quenchless rage.
VI. If any could desire what he is incapable of possessing, despair must be his eternal lot.
Embraces are comminglings from the head even to the feet, And not a pompous high priest entering by a secret place.
Come o’er the eastern hills, and let our winds Kiss thy perfumed garments; let us taste Thy morn and evening breath; scatter thy pearls Upon our love-sick land that mourns for thee.
My mother groaned, my father wept, into the dangerous world I leapt.
Knowledge of ideal beauty is not to be acquired. It is born with us. Innate ideas are in every man, born with him; theyare truly himself.
Angels are happier than men and devils, because they are not always prying after good and evil in one another, and eating the tree of knowledge for Satan’s gratification.
If others had not been foolish, we should be so.
O Winter! bar thine adamantine doors: The north is thine; there hast thou build thy dark, Deep-founded habitation. Shake not thy roofs, Nor bend thy pillars with thine iron car.
Little fly, thy summer’s play My thoughtless hand has brushed away. Am not I a fly like thee? Or art not thou a man like me? For I dance and drink and sing, Till some blind hand shall brush my wing!
It is not because angels are holier than men or devils that makes them angels, but because they do not expect holiness from one another, but from God only.
He loves to sit and hear me sing, Then, laughing, sports and plays with me; Then stretches out my golden wing, And mocks my loss of liberty.
Fun I love, but too much fun is of all things the most loathsome. Mirth is better than fun, and happiness is better than mirth.
Joy and woe are woven fine.
Where any view of money exists, art cannot be carried on.
Then my verse I dishonor, my pictures despise, my person degrade and my temper chastise; and the pen is my terror, the pencil my shame; and my talents I bury, and dead is my fame.
Every man who is not an artist is a traitor to his own nature.
Then cherish pity, lest you drive an angel from your door.
Every mortal loss is an immortal gain.
He who replies to words of doubt doth put the light of knowledge out.
I know that this world is a world of Imagination and Vision.
Men are admitted into heaven not because they have curbed or governed their passions, but because they have cultivate their understandings.
To cast aside from Poetry, all that is not Inspiration.
Colouring does not depend on where the colours are put, but on where the lights and darks are put, and all depends on form and outline, on where that is put.
Rhetoric completes the tools of learning. Dialectic zeros in on the logic of things, of particular systems of thought or subjects. Rhetoric takes the next grand step and brings all these subjects together into one whole.
The glory of Christianity is to conquer by forgiveness.
Let men do their duty and the women will be such wonders; the female lives from the light of the male: see a male’s female dependants, you know the man.
Think not thou canst sigh a sigh And thy maker is not by; Think not thou canst weep a tear And thy maker is not near.
Lives in eternity’s sun rise.
There is a place where Contrarieties are equally True...
O white-robed Angel, guide my timorous hand to write as on a lofty rock with iron pen the words of truth, that all who pass may read.
Poetry fettered fetters the human race.
Did he who made the lamb make thee?
She who dwells with me whom I have loved with such communion, that no place on earth can ever be solitude to me.
Invention depends altogether upon execution or organization; as that is right or wrong so is the invention perfect or imperfect.
Think in the morning. Act in the noon.
He who wants, but doesn’t act, is a pest.
A musician, an artist, an architect: the man or woman who is not one of these is not a Christian.
Works of Art can only be produc’d in Perfection where the Man is either in Affluence or is Above the Care of it.
The little ones leaped, and shouted, and laugh’d And all the hills echoed.
Every harlot was a virgin once.
That the Jews assumed a right exclusively to the benefits of God will be a lasting witness against them and the same will it be against Christians.
What has reasoning to do with painting?
As I was walking among the fires of hell, delighted with the enjoyments of Genius.
It is the greatest of crimes to depress true art and science.
Never seek to tell thy love; Love that never told can be.
The Learned, who strive to ascend into Heaven by means of learning, appear to Children like dead horses, when repelled by the celestial spheres.
None but blockheads copy each other.
Down the winding cavern we groped our tedious way, till a void boundless as the nether sky appeared beneath us, and we held by the roots of trees and hung over this immensity; but I said: if you please we will commit ourselves to this void and see whether providence is here also.
Imagination, the real and eternal world of which this Vegetable Universe is but a faint shadow. What is the life of Man but Art and Science?
Than you’ll see the world as it is : infinte.
Praise is the practice of Art.
I live in a hole here but God has a beautiful mansion for me elsewhere.
Now hear a plain fact: Swedenborg has not written one new truth. Now hear another: he has written all the old falsehoods.
The moon, like a flower in heaven’s high bower, with silent delight sits and smiles on the night.
A dead body revenges not injuries.
Lo! now the direful monster, whose skin clings To his strong bones, strides o’er the groaning rocks: He withers all in silence, and his hand Unclothes the earth, and freezes up frail life.
For where’er the sun does shine, And where’er the rain does fall, Babe can never hunger there, Nor poverty the mind appall.
The stars are threshed, and the souls are threshed from their husks.
The Bat that flits at close of Eve Has left the Brain that won’t believe. The Owl that calls upon the Night Speaks the Unbeliever’s fright.
Reason, or the ratio of all we have already known, is not the same that it shall be when we know more.
Struggling in my father’s hands, Striving against my swaddling bands, Bound and weary, I thought best To sulk upon my mother’s breast.
The look of love alarms Because ’tis filled with fire; But the look of soft deceit Shall sin the lover’s hire.
If the lion was advised by the fox, he would be cunning.
When my mother died I was very young, And my father sold me while yet my tongue Could scarcely cry weep weep weep weep. So your chimneys I sweep, and in soot I sleep.
He who has suffered you to impose on him knows you.
He who does not imagine in stronger and better lineaments, and in stronger and better light than his perishing and mortal eye can see, does not imagine at all.
The spirits of the air live on the smells Of fruit; and joy, with pinions light, roves round The gardens, or sits singing in the trees...
But to go to school in a summer morn, O! It drives all joy away; Under a cruel eye outworn, The little ones spend the day In sighing and dismay.
Travelers repose and dream among my leaves.
Thou art a man God is no more Thy own humanity Learn to adore.
Eternity is in love with the productions of time. The busy bee has no time for sorrow. The hours of folly are measur’d by the clock, but of wisdom: no clock can measure.
Where lambs have nibbled, silent moves the feet of angels bright; unseen they pour blessing, and joy without ceasing, on each bud and blossom, and each sleeping bosom.
The countless gold of a merry heart, The rubies and pearls of a loving eye, The indolent never can bring to the mart, Nor the secret hoard up in his treasury.
Bring me an axe and spade, Bring me a winding-sheet; When I my grave have made Let winds and tempests beat: Then down I’ll lie as cold as clay. True love doth pass away!
All wholesome food is caught without a net or trap.
When Sir Joshua Reynolds died All Nature was degraded; The King dropped a tear in the Queen’s ear, And all his pictures faded.
Poetry fettered, fetters the human race. Nations are destroyed or flourish in proportion as their poetry, painting, and music are destroyed or flourish.
The generations of men run on in the tide of time, but leave their destined lineaments permanent for ever and ever.
When nations grow old the Arts grow cold And commerce settles on every tree.
The apple tree never asks the beech how he shall grow, nor the lion, the horse, how he shall take his prey.
The fields from Islington to Marybone, To Primrose Hill and Saint John’s Wood, Were builded over with pillars of gold; And there Jerusalem’s pillars stood.
My silks and fine array, My smiles and languished air, By love are driv’n away And mournful lean Despair Brings me yew to deck my grave: Such end true lovers have.
God forbid that Truth should be confined to Mathematical Demonstration!
Like a fiend in a cloud, With howling woe After night I do crowd And with night will go; I turn my back to the east, From whence comforts have increased; For light cloth seize my brain With frantic pain.
My mother bore me in the southern wild, And I am black, but O! my soul is white; White as an angel is the English child, But I am black as if bereaved of light.
A tyrant is the worst disease, and the cause of all others.
To the eyes of a miser a guinea is more beautiful than the sun, and a bag worn with the use of money has more beautiful proportions than a vine filled with grapes.
God keep me from the divinity of Yes and Nothe Yea Nay Creeping Jesus, from supposing Up and Down to be the same thing as allexperimentalists must suppose.
The Fool shall not enter into Heaven let him be ever so Holy.
Dear Mother, dear Mother, the Church is cold, But the Ale-house is healthy and pleasant and warm.
Silent as despairing love, and strong as jealousy...
How sweet I roamed from field to field, And tasted all the summer’s pride, Till I the prince of love beheld, Who in the sunny beams did glide!
The ignorant Insults of Individuals will not hinder me from doing my duty to my Art.
There is no mistake so great as the mistake of not going on.
The difference between a bad artist and a good one is: the bad artist seems to copy a great deal; the good one really does.
Sweet babe, in thy face Soft desires I can trace, Secret joys and secret smiles, Little pretty infant wiles.
Thou fair-hair’d angel of the evening, Now, whilst the sun rests on the mountains, light Thy bright torch of love; thy radiant crown Put on, and smile upon our evening bed!
I love hanging and drawing and quartering Every bit as well as war and slaughtering.
Did he smile his work to see? Did he who made the Lamb make thee?
The Man who pretends to be a modest enquirer into the truth of a self-evident thing is a Knave.
I heard an Angel singing; When the day was springing, Mercy, Pity, Peace; Is the world’s release.
Praises reap not! Joys laugh not! Sorrows weep not!
The gulfing whale was like a dot in the spell. Yet look upon it, and ’twould size and swell To its huge self, and the minutest fish Would pass the very hardest gazer’s wish, And show his little eye’s anatomy.
Christianity is art and not money. Money is its curse.
Art degraded, Imagination denied.
I am going to that country which I have all my life wished to see.
Although wine when it is read somewhat lacks the savour of wine when it is drunk, wine remains a very pleasant thing both to read about and to chat about.
Love seeketh only self to please, To bind another to its delight, Joys in another’s loss of ease, And builds a Hell in Heaven’s despite.
The morning comes, the night decays, the watchmen leave their stations.
Let every Christian, as much as in him lies, engage himself openly and publicly, before all the World, in some mental pursuit for the Building up of Jerusalem.
Naught can deform the human race Like to the armor’s iron brace.
How have you left the ancient love That bards of old enjoyed in you! The languid strings do scarcely move! The sound is forced, the notes are few!
On no other ground Can I sow my seed Without tearing up Some stinking weed.
I’m sure this Jesus will not do Either for Englishman or Jew.
General good is the plea of the scoundrel, hypocite, flatterer.
Mercy is the golden chain by which society is bound together.
There is a place where Contrarieties are equally true. This place is called Beulah. it is a pleasant lovely Shadow, where no dispute can come, because of those who sleep.
But if at church they would give some ale. And a pleasant fire our souls to regale. We’d sing and we’d pray all the live long day, Nor ever once from the church to stray.
Where cheating is, there’s mischief there.
Can I see a falling tear, And not feel my sorrow’s share?
He who shall teach the child to doubtThe rotting grave shall ne’er get out.
Tyger! Tyger! Burning bright in the forests of the night...
To Chloe’s breast young Cupid slily stole, But he crept in at Myra’s pocket-hole.
Mercy, pity, and peace, Are the world’s release.
They solved the problem of coexistence through the use of individual stereo headphones.
Every tear from every eyeBecomes a babe in eternity.
Harmony of colouring is destructive of art? it is like the smile of a fool.
When Sir Joshua Reynolds died All Nature was degraded.
Christ’s crucifix shall be made an excuse for executing criminals.
The selfish, smiling fool, and the sullen, frowning fool shall be both thought wise, that they may be a rod.
Painters are noted for being dissipated and wild.
Every kindness to another is a little death in the divine image.
Merrily, merrily, to welcome in the year. Little lamb, Here I am; Come and lick My white neck; Let me pull Your soft wool; Let me kiss Your soft face; Merrily, merrily, to welcome in the year.
Folly is the cloak of knavery.
Can Wisdom be put in a silver rod? Or Love in a golden bowl?
They accumulate A world in which Man is by his nature the enemy of Man.
And all must love the human form, In heathen, Turk or Jew. Where Mercy, Love, and Pity dwell, There God is dwelling too.
Graze after thee, and weep. For, washed in life’s river, My bright mane for ever Shall shine like the gold, As I guard o’er the fold.
The Jewish and Christian Testaments are an original derivation from the Poetic Genius.
Arise from out the dewy grass! Night is worn, And the morn Rises from the slumberous mass. Turn away no more; Why wilt thou turn away? The starry floor, The watery shore, Are given thee till the break of day.
FOR EVERY THING THAT LIVES IS HOLY
I loved Theotormon
And I was not ashamed
I trembled in my virgin fears
And I hid in Leutha's Vale!
I plucked Leutha's flower,
And I rose up from the vale;
But the terrible thunders tore
My virgin mantle in twain.
Enslav'd, the Daughters of Albion weep; a trembling lamentation
Upon their mountains; in their valleys, sighs towards America.
For the soft soul of America, Oothoon wanderd in woe,
Along the vales of Leutha seeking flowers to comfort her;
And thus she spoke to the bright Marygold of Leutha's vale
Art thou a flower! art though a nymph! I see thee now a flower;
Now a nymph! I dare not pluck thee from thy dewy bed!
The Golden nymph replied; pluck thou my flower Oothoon the mild
Another flower shall spring. because the soul of sweet delight
Can never pass away, she ceas'd & closed her golden shrine.
Then Oothoon pluck'd the flower saying, I pluck thee from thy bed
Sweet flower. and put thee here to glow between my breasts
And thus I turn to where my whole soul seeks.
Over the waves she went in wing'd exulting swift delight;
And over Theotormon's reign, took her impetuous course.
Bromion rent her with his thunders. on his stormy bed
Lay the faint maid, and soon her woes apalld his thunders hoarse
Bromion spoke. behold this harlot here on Bromions bed.
And let the jealous dolphins sport around the lovely maid:
Thy soft American plains are mine, and mine thy north & south:
Stampt with my signet are the swarthy children of the sun;
They are obedient, they resist not, they obey the scourge:
Their daughters worship terrors and obey the violent:
Now thou maist marry Bromions harlot, and protect the child
Of Bromions rage, that Oothoon shall put forth in nine moons time
Then storms rent Theotormons limbs; he rolld his waves around.
And folded his black jealous waters round the adulterate pair
Bound back to back in Bromions caves terror & meekness dwell
At entrance Theotormon sits wearing the threshold hard
With secret tears; beneath him sound like waves on a desart shore
The voice of slaves beneath the sun, and children bought with money,
That shiver in religious caves beneath the burning fores
Of lust, that belch incessant from the summits of the earth
Oothoon weeps not. she cannot weep! her tears are locked up;
But she can howl incessant writhing her soft snowy limbs.
And calling Theotormons Eagles to prey upon her flesh.
I call with holy voice! kings of the sounding air,
Rend away this defiled bosom that I may reflect,
The image of Theotormon on my pure transparent breast.
The Eagles at her call descend & rend their bleeding prey;
Theotormon severely smiles. Her soul reflects the smile;
As the clear spring muddled with feet of beasts grows pure & smiles
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, & eccho back her sighs.
Why does Theotormon sit weeping upon the threshold:
And Oothoon hovers by his side, perswading him in vain:
I cry arise O Theotormon for the village dog
Barks at the breaking day. the nightingale has done lamenting
The lark does rustle in the ripe corn, and the Eagle returns
From nightly prey, and lifts his golden beak to the pure east;
Shaking the dust from his immortal points to awake
The sun that sleeps too long. Arise my Theotormon I am pure.
Because the night is gone that closed me in its deadly black.
They told me that the night & day were all that I could see;
They told me that I had five senses to inclose me up.
And they inclos'd my infinite brain into a narrow circle,
And sunk my heart into the Abyss, a red round globe hot burning
Till all from life I was obliterated and erased.
Instead of morn arises a bright shadow, like an eye
In the eastern cloud: instead of night a sickly charnel house;
That Theotormon hears me not! to him the night and morn
Are both alike: A night of sighs, a morning of fresh tears;
And none but Bromion can hear my lamentations.
With what sense is it that the chicken shuns the ravenous hawk?
With what sense does the tame pigeon measure out the expanse?
With what sense does the bee form cells? have not the mouse & frog
Eyes and ears and sense of touch? yet are their habitations.
And their pursuits, as different as their forms and as their joys:
Ask the wild ass why he refuses burdens: and the meek camel
Why he loves man: is it because of eye ear mouth or skin
Or breathing nostrils? No, for these the wolf and tyger have.
Ask the blind worm the secrets of the grave, and why her spires
Love to curl round the bones of death! and ask the rav'nous snake
Where she gets poison: & the wing'd eagle why he loves the sun
And then tell me the thoughts of man, which have been hid of old.
Silent I hover all the night, and all day could be silent,
If Theotormon once would turn his loved eyes upon me;
How can I be defild when I reflect thy image pure?
Sweetest the fruit that the worms feeds on. & the soul prey'd on by woe,
The new wash'd lamb ting'd with the village smoke & the bright swan
By the red earth of our immortal river: I bathe my wings,
And I am white and pure to hover round Theotormons breast.
Then Theotormon broke his silence, and he answered.
Tell me what is the night or day to one o'erflowd with woe?
Tell me what is a thought? & of what substance is it made?
Tell me what is a joy? & in what gardens do joys grow?
And in what rivers swim the sorrows? and upon what mountains
Wave shadows of discontent? and in what houses dwell the wretched
Drunken with a woe forgotten. and shut up from cold despair,
Tell me where dwell the thoughts forgotten till thou call them forth
Tell me where dwell the joys of old! & where the ancient loves?
And when will they renew again & the night of oblivion past?
That I might traverse times and spaces far remote and bring
Comforts into a pre[s]ent sorrow and a night of pain
Where goest thou O thought! to what remote land is thy flight?
If thou returnest to the present moment of affliction
Wilt thou bring comforts on thy wings, and dews and honey and balm;
Or poison from the desart wilds, from the eyes of the envier.
Then Bromion said: and shook the cavern with his lamentation
Thou knowest that the ancient trees seen by thy eyes have fruit;
But knowest thou that trees and fruit flourish upon the earth
To gratify senses unknown? trees beasts and birds unknown:
Unknown, not unperceived, spread in the infinite microscope,
In places yet unvisited by the voyager. and in worlds
Over another kind of seas, and in atmospheres unknown.
Ah! are there other wars, beside the wars of sword and fire!
And are there other sorrows, beside the sorrows of poverty?
And are there other joys, beside the joys of riches and ease?
And is there not one law for both the lion and the ox?
And is there not eternal fire, and eternal chains?
To bind the phantoms of existence from eternal life?
Then Oothoon waited silent all the day, and all the night,
But when the morn arose, her lamentation renewd,
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, & eccho back her sighs.
O Urizen! Creator of men! mistaken Demon of heaven;
Thy joys are tears! thy labour vain, to form men to thine image.
How can one absorb another? are not different joys
Holy, eternal, infinite! and each joy is a Love.
Does not the great mouth laugh at a gift? & the narrow eyelids mock
At the labour that is above payment, and wilt thou take the ape
For thy councellor? or the dog. for a schoolmaster to thy children?
Does he who contemns poverty, and he who turns with abhorrence
From usury: feel the same passion or are they moved alike?
How can the giver of gifts experience the delights of the merchant?
How the industrious citizen the pains of the husbandman.
How different far the fat fed hireling with hollow drum;
Who buys whole corn fields into wastes, and sings upon the heath:
How different their eye and ear! how different the world to them!
With what sense does the parson claim the labour of the farmer?
What are his nets & gins & traps, & how does he surround him
With cold floods of abstraction, and with forests of solitude,
To build him castles and high spires, where kings & priests may dwell.
Till she who burns with youth, and knows no fixed lot; is bound
In spells of law to one she loaths: and must she drag the chain
Of life, in weary lust! must chilling murderous thoughts, obscure
The clear heaven of her eternal spring! to bear the wintry rage
Of a harsh terror driv'n to madness, bound to hold a rod
Over her shrinking shoulders all the day; and all the night
To turn the wheel of false desire: and longings that wake her womb
To the abhorred birth of cherubs in the human form
That live a pestilence & die a meteor & are no more.
Till the child dwell with one he hates, and do all the deeds he loaths
And the impure scourge force his seed into its unripe birth
E'er yet his eyelids can behold the arrows of the day.
Does the whale worship at thy footsteps as the hungry dog?
Or does he scent the mountain prey, because his nostrils wide
Draw in the ocean? does his eye discern the flying cloud
As the ravens eye? or does he measure the expanse like the vulture?
Does the still spider view the cliffs where eagles hide their young?
Or does the fly rejoice, because the harvest is brought in?
Does not the eagle scorn the earth & despise the treasures beneath?
But the mole knoweth what is there, & the worm shall tell it thee.
Does not the worm erect a pillar in the mouldering church yard?
And a palace of eternity in the jaws of the hungry grave
Over his porch these words are written. Take thy bliss O Man!
And sweet shall be thy taste & sweet thy infant joys renew!
Infancy, fearless, lustful, happy! nestling for delight
In laps of pleasure; Innocence! honest, open, seeking
The vigorous joys of morning light; open to virgin bliss.
Who taught thee modesty, subtil modesty! child of night & sleep
When thou awakest. wilt thou dissemble all thy secret joys
Or wert thou not awake when all this mystery was disclos'd!
Then com'st thou forth a modest virgin knowing to dissemble
With nets found under thy night pillow, to catch virgin joy,
And brand it with the name of whore: & sell it in the night,
In silence, ev'n without a whisper, and in seeming sleep,
Religious dream and holy vespers, light thy smoky fires:
Once were thy fires lighted by the eyes of honest morn
And does my Theotormon seek this hypocrite modesty!
This knowing, artful, secret. fearful, cautious, trembling hypocrite.
Then is Oothoon a whore indeed! and all the virgin joys
Of life are harlots: and Theotormon is a sick mans dream
And Oothoon is the crafty slave of selfish holiness.
But Oothoon is not so, a virgin fill'd with virgin fancies
Open to joy and to delight where ever beauty appears
If in the morning sun I find it; there my eyes are fix'd
In happy copulation; if in evening mild, wearied with work;
Sit on a bank and draw the pleasures of this free born joy.
The moment of desire! the moment of desire! The virgin
That pines for man; shall awaken her womb to enormous joys
In the secret shadows of her chamber; the youth shut up from
The lustful joy, shall forget to generate, & create an amorous image
In the shadows of his curtains and in the folds of his silent pillow.
Are not these the places of religion? the rewards of continence!
The self enjoyings of self denial? Why dost thou seek religion?
Is it because acts are not lovely, that thou seekest solitude,
Where the horrible darkness is impressed with reflections of desire.
Father of Jealousy, be thou accursed from the earth!
Why hast thou taught my Theotormon this accursed thing?
Till beauty fades from off my shoulders darken'd and cast out,
A solitary shadow wailing on the margin of non-entity.
I cry, Love! Love! Love! happy happy Love! free as the mountain wind!
Can that be Love, that drinks another as a sponge drinks water?
That clouds with jealousy his nights, with weepings all the day:
To spin a web of age around him, grey and hoary! dark!
Till his eyes sicken at the fruit that hangs before his sight.
Such is self-love that envies all! a creeping skeleton
With lamplike eyes watching around the frozen marriage bed.
But silken nets and traps of adamant will Oothoon spread,
And catch for the girls of mild silver, or of furious gold;
I'll lie beside thee on a bank & view their wanton play
In lovely copulation bliss on bliss with Theotormon;
Red as the rosy morning, lustful as the first born beam,
Oothoon shall view his dear delight, nor e'er with jealous cloud
Come in the heavens of generous love; nor selfish blightings bring.
Does the sun walk in glorious raiment, on the secret floor
Where the cold miser spreads his gold? or does the bright cloud drop
On his stone threshold? does his eye behold the beam that brings
Expansion to the eye of pity? or will he bind himself
Beside the ox to thy hard furrow? does not that mild beam blot
The bat, the owl, the glowing tyger, and the king of night.
The sea fowl takes the wintry blast. for a cov'ring to her limbs:
And the wild snake, the pestilence to adorn him with gems & gold.
And trees. & birds. & beasts, & men. behold their eternal joy.
Arise you little glancing wings, and sing your infant joy!
Arise and drink your bliss. For everything that lives is holy!
Thus every morning wails Oothoon. but Theotormon sits
Upon the margind ocean conversing with shadows dire,
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, & eccho back her sighs.
The Eternal Female groan’d; it was heard over all the earth
Albion’s coast is sick silent; the American meadows faint.
Shadows of prophecy shiver along by the lakes and the rivers, and mutter across the ocean. France, rend down thy dungeon!
Golden Spain, burst the barriers of old Rome!
Cast thy keys, O Rome, into the deep—down falling, even to eternity down falling;
And weep!
In her trembling hands she took the new-born terror, howling.
On those infinite mountains of light now barr’d out by the Atlanticsea, the new-born fire stood before the starry king.
Flagg’d with grey-brow’d snows and thunderous visages, the jealous wings wav’d over the deep.
The speary hand burn’d aloft; unbuckled was the shield; forth went the hand of jealousy among the flaming hair, and hurl’d the new-born wonder through the starry night.
The fire, the fire is falling!
Look up! look up! O citizen of London, enlarge thy countenance! O Jew, leave counting gold; return to thy oil and wine! O African, black African
Go, winged thought, widen his forehead
The fiery limbs, the flaming hair shot like the sinking sun into the Western sea
Wak’d from his eternal sleep, the hoary element roaring fled away
Down rush’d, beating his wings in vain, the jealous king, his grey-brow’d councillors, thunderous warriors, curl’d veterans, among helms and shields, and chariots, horses, elephants, banners, castles, slings, and rocks
Falling, rushing, ruining; buried in the ruins, on Urthona’s dens
All night beneath the ruins; then their sullen flames, faded, emerge round the gloomy king.
With thunder and fire, leading his starry hosts through the waste wilderness, he promulgates his ten commandments, glancing his beamy eyelids over the deep in dark dismay.
Where the Son of Fire in his Eastern cloud, while the Morning plumes her golden breast,
Spurning the clouds written with curses, stamps the stony law to dust, loosing the eternal horses from the dens of night, crying:
Empire is no more! and now the lion and wolf shall cease.
Let the Priests of the Raven of Dawn, no longer in deadly black, with hoarse note curse the Sons of Joy. Nor his accepted brethren whom, tyrant, he calls free, lay the bound or build the roof. Nor pale religious lechery call that virginity that wishes, but acts not!
For everything that lives is holy
Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burden’d air,
Hungry clouds swag on the deep.
Once meek, and in a perilous path
The just man kept his course along
The Vale of Death.
Roses are planted where thorns grow,
And on the barren heath
Sing the honey bees.
Then the perilous path was planted,
And a river and a spring
On every cliff and tomb;
[6]
And on the bleached bones
Red clay brought forth:
Till the villain left the paths of ease
To walk in perilous paths, and drive
The just man into barren climes.
Now the sneaking serpent walks
In mild humility;
And the just man rages in the wilds
Where lions roam.
Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burden’d air,
Hungry clouds swag on the deep.
All Bibles or sacred codes have been the cause of the following errors:—
That man has two real existing principles, viz., a Body and a Soul.
That Energy, called Evil, is alone from the Body; and that Reason, called Good, is alone from the Soul.
That God will torment man in Eternity for following his Energies.
But the following contraries to these are true:—
Man has no Body distinct from his Soul. For that called Body is a portion of Soul discerned by the five senses, the chief inlets of Soul in this age.
Energy is the only life, and is from the Body; and Reason is the bound or outward circumference of Energy.
Energy is Eternal Delight.
Those who restrain desire, do so because theirs is weak enough to be restrained; and the restrainer or reason usurps its place and governs the unwilling.
And being restrained, it by degrees becomes passive, till it is only the shadow of desire.
The history of this is written in Paradise Lost, and the Governor or Reason is called Messiah.
And the original Archangel or possessor of the command of the heavenly host is called the Devil, or Satan, and his children are called Sin and Death.
But in the book of Job, Milton’s Messiah is called Satan.
For this history has been adopted by both parties.
It indeed appeared to Reason as if[10] desire was cast out, but the Devil’s account is, that the Messiah fell, and formed a heaven of what he stole from the abyss.
This is shown in the Gospel, where he prays to the Father to send the Comforter or desire that Reason may have ideas to build on, the Jehovah of the Bible being no other than he who dwells in flaming fire. Know that after Christ’s death he became Jehovah.
But in Milton, the Father is Destiny, the Son a ratio of the five senses, and the Holy Ghost vacuum!
In seed-time learn, in harvest teach, in winter enjoy.
Drive your cart and your plough over the bones of the dead.
The road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom.
Prudence is a rich ugly old maid courted by Incapacity.
He who desires, but acts not, breeds pestilence.
The cut worm forgives the plough.
Dip him in the river who loves water.
A fool sees not the same tree that a wise man sees.
He whose face gives no light shall never become a star.
Eternity is in love with the productions of time.
The busy bee has no time for sorrow.
The hours of folly are measured by the clock, but of wisdom no clock can measure.
All wholesome food is caught without a net or a trap.
Bring out number, weight, and measure in a year of dearth.
No bird soars too high if he soars with his own wings.
A dead body revenges not injuries.
The most sublime act is to set another before you.
If the fool would persist in his folly he would become wise.
Folly is the cloak of knavery.
Shame is Pride’s cloak.
Prisons are built with stones of law, brothels with bricks of religion.
The pride of the peacock is the glory of God.
The lust of the goat is the bounty of God.
The wrath of the lion is the wisdom of God.
The nakedness of woman is the work of God.
Excess of sorrow laughs, excess of joy weeps.
The roaring of lions, the howling of wolves, the raging of the stormy sea, and the destructive sword, are portions of Eternity too great for the eye of man.
The fox condemns the trap, not himself.
Joys impregnate, sorrows bring forth.
Let man wear the fell of the lion, woman the fleece of the sheep.
The bird a nest, the spider a web, man friendship.
The selfish smiling fool and the sullen frowning fool shall be both thought wise that they may be a rod.
What is now proved was once only imagined.
The rat, the mouse, the fox, the rabbit watch the roots; the lion, the tiger, the horse, the elephant watch the fruits.
The cistern contains, the fountain overflows.
One thought fills immensity.
Always be ready to speak your mind, and a base man will avoid you.
Everything possible to be believed is an image of truth.
The eagle never lost so much time[17] as when he submitted to learn of the crow.
The fox provides for himself, but God provides for the lion.
Think in the morning, act in the noon, eat in the evening, sleep in the night.
He who has suffered you to impose on him knows you.
As the plough follows words, so God rewards prayers.
The tigers of wrath are wiser than the horses of instruction.
Expect poison from the standing water.
You never know what is enough unless you know what is more than enough.
Listen to the fool’s reproach; it is a kingly title.
The eyes of fire, the nostrils of air,[18] the mouth of water, the beard of earth.
The weak in courage is strong in cunning.
The apple tree never asks the beech how he shall grow, nor the lion the horse how he shall take his prey.
The thankful receiver bears a plentiful harvest.
If others had not been foolish we should have been so.
The soul of sweet delight can never be defiled.
When thou seest an eagle, thou seest a portion of Genius. Lift up thy head!
As the caterpillar chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs on, so the priest lays his curse on the fairest joys.
To create a little flower is the labour of ages.
Damn braces; bless relaxes.
The best wine is the oldest, the best water the newest.
Prayers plough not; praises reap not; joys laugh not; sorrows weep not.
The head Sublime, the heart Pathos, the genitals Beauty, the hands and feet Proportion.
As the air to a bird, or the sea to a fish, so is contempt to the contemptible.
The crow wished everything was black; the owl that everything was white.
Exuberance is Beauty.
If the lion was advised by the fox, he would be cunning.
Improvement makes straight roads, but the crooked roads without Improvement are roads of Genius.
Sooner murder an infant in its cradle than nurse unacted desires.
Where man is not, nature is barren.
Truth can never be told so as to be understood and not to be believed.
Enough! or Too much.
The fool is not wise, but the wise is not foolish.